# The hosts file

Ansible uses its own hosts file to define which machines it will operate on; it is an inventory of all the target servers. Although servers can be defined undifferentiated, it is normal to group them under functional headings. I could define groups as shown below.

I can deal with Ubuntu and CentOS tasks separately, and then also deal with all Apache servers regardless of their base OS.

As you can imagine, the configuration of a real Apache server can be really complicated. Consider that all Web servers these days support HTTPS. When you are standing up a Web Server the chances are, you’re also going to have to copy across keys and certificates and configure them!

```
[UB1804]
UB1.example.com
UB2.example.com 

[CO7]
CO7-1.example.com
CO7-2.example.com 

[Apache]
UB1.example.com
CO7-2.example.com 
```

You can also define groups of groups. In the example above, to address all my learning servers

```
[AllLinux]
CO7
UB1804
```

# Dynamic Inventory

Once we get to large-scale cloud environments, static configuration files are no longer adequate to tracker infrastructure. Suppose I have a flexible deployment where I provision services as required in AWS. In this case, my inventory will be dynamic in nature, new server instances will spin up and spin down as required. 

Ansible handles this by allowing an inventory file to be executable under-Python. If Ansible sees an executable file, it assumes that it should be run and that it will return a JSON object with the inventory data.

At the other end of all this is a cloud service provider like AWS, which provides an API containing this inventory information.

# Configuration Files
We can have a section in the playbooks with any variables required to keep things tidy.

```
vars:
  secret_key: /users/johnoraw/.ssh/secret.rsa
```
Playbooks can be long and complex, as can the inventory file. For this reason, we may have separate configuration files to hold things like defaults and security key information. We can then declare this grouped variable information file in the playbook.

```
vars_files:
  jor_keys.yml
```
When host configuration information gets too complex, we can dedicate an individual file to a host and save it in the directory host_vars. 
When group configuration information gets too complex, we can dedicate an individual file to the group and save it in the directory group_vars.